# Project Title: Let the Earth Breathe. Weather You Like It or Not.

##### Team XTREME - ITBA 3206 Leander Allan M. Mendoza

## Introduction
Who would have thought that the past will greatly influence the way people of the present lives? Remains from plants and animals that existed millions of years ago play a major role in how we humans live our lives. These remains are the so-called "Fossil Fuels" which are considered a source of non-renewable energy that is being used in different aspects of life. Fossil Fuels are essential for human survival and daily living, and they are the world's principal energy source. They are utilized in the production of ordinary products such as computers, cosmetics, paint, household appliances, heating, transportation, and electricity generation. For more than a century, fossil fuels have provided the majority of the energy needed to power our automobiles, run our businesses, and keep our homes lit. Oil, coal, and gas still provide about 80% of our energy needs today.<sup>[1]</sup> The most common source of non-renewable energy is typically known as coal, crude oil, and natural gases that have high carbon content. Coal is the highest with 223 pounds of carbon dioxide per million British thermal units, followed by oil with 163 pounds of carbon dioxide per million British thermal units, and lastly naturalalready gases with 117 pounds of carbon dioxide per million British thermal units. <sup>[2]</sup>

All of the countries in the world benefit from the existence of fossil fuels while the world itself suffers from its recoil. The Earth's atmosphere takes damage for every non-renewable energy that is used. When fossil fuels are burned, enormous volumes of carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, are discharged into the atmosphere. Global warming is caused by greenhouse gases, which confine heat in our atmosphere. The average global temperature has alrelady risen by 1 degree Celcius. Warming exceeding 1.5 degree Celcius increases the risk of escalating sea lvels, harsh weather, biodiversity loss and extinction, food scarcity, and increasing health and poverty for millions of people around the world. <sup>[3]</sup> Climate change has a wide range of impacts on populations and the environment, the majority of which have been addressed directly, such as floods, droughts, and fires. <sup>[4]</sup>

During the year 1988, it is said that it was the starting point of when global warming gets real. The global temperature suddenly increased and it was a critical point when watershed events placed global warming in the spotlight. <sup>[5]</sup> In that same year it marked the beginning of the worldwide problem that scientist are aware of what it might do and what it can bring upon us. What started in the summer of the year 1988 became o much serious matter and now in the year 2022, scientists in the United Nation are desperate, crying, begging, and are arrested. In April year 2022, scientists protested "End Fossil Fuels Now" and "Let the Earth Breathe."

## Problem Statement
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has determined that fossil fuel emissions are the major contributor to global warming. Fossil fuels and industry reported 89 percent of worldwide CO2 emissions in 2018. Coal is a fossil fuel that is the dirtiest of them all, accounting for more than 0.3°C of the 1°C rise in global average temperatures. As a result, it is the single largest contributor to global warming. When oil is burned, it releases a significant amount of carbon, accounting for around a third of global carbon emissions. In recent years, there have also been sequences of oil leaks that have wreaked havoc on our ocean's environment. Natural gas is commonly advertised as a more environmentally friendly energy source than coal and oil. Natural gas, on the other hand, is still a fossil fuel that contributes a fifth of global carbon emissions. <sup>[3]</sup>

According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), human-induced climate change is creating a hazardous and pervasive disturbance in nature, affecting the lives of billions of people around the world. People and ecosystems that are least able to cope are the ones who suffer the most. Heatwaves, droughts, and floods are already pushing plants and animals to their limits, causing mass extinctions in species like forests and corals. These weather extremes are happening at the same time, resulting in cascade effects that are becoming more difficult to manage. They have put millions of people in jeopardy of running out of food and water, particularly in Africa, Asia, Central and South America, small islands, and the Arctic. To minimize further loss of life, wildlife, and infrastructure, immediate, ambitious, and swift action is needed. <sup>[6]</sup>

The combustion of fossil fuels emits long-lived greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and short-lived pollutants such as sulfur dioxide, all of which contribute to the creation of atmospheric aerosols. Aerosols in the atmosphere can chill the climate, disguising some of the warming effects caused by greenhouse gas emissions. When inhaled, however, aerosol particulates are exceedingly hazardous, resulting in millions of early deaths each year. As a result, phasing out unchecked fossil-fuel combustion would not only improve health but will also lessen the extent to which greenhouse-gas-induced warming is concealed by aerosols. <sup>[7]</sup>

Greenhouse gas emissions must be cut in half by 2030 and nil by 2050 to ensure a livable environment. Governments and corporations must take bold, quick, and broad-based action. However, citizens must participate in the transition to a low-carbon society, particularly in rich economies. Every one of us can contribute to limiting global warming and protecting our planet. We can be part of the solution and influence change by making choices that are less destructive to the environment. <sup>[8]</sup>

Studies by various scientists in the United Nations showed that the planet earth only has 3-5 years left before its end. It is stated in their studies that the continuous use of fossil fuels is the one major factor. Every fossil fuel that is burned emits greenhouse gases that entrap heat in the atmosphere. From air and water pollution to global warming, using fossil fuels for energy has taken a huge toll on humans and the environment. That's in addition to the detrimental consequences of petroleum-based items like plastics and chemicals. <sup>[9]</sup>

## Significance of the Proposed Project

The use of fossil fuels has resulted in a lot of occurrences whether it is used for electricity or to run factories, type of machinery, and many more. One thing is for sure it did help a lot of people in living out their everyday lives. Though these kinds of non-renewable sources of energy may have a great impact on the lives of many people, it also did have a great impact on our planet.  This study is made to provide valuable information on what may be the cause of climate change and what may it bring upon us. 

Students. For students that may tackle this kind of study, it will surely provide necessary pieces of information that are needed. 

Community. For the benefit of the community that strives to promote a cleaner and greener Earth. A place where fossil fuels are no longer needed.

Government. For the government officials who have the power and authority to make a stand on the current crisis about the fast-changing climate change.

## Methods

The effects of climate change on natural and human systems will become more severe as the scale of the problem grows. Interventions to mitigate existing and predicted implications of climate change are thus critical. However, there is little evidence of their efficiency, underlining the necessity for proper ecological indicators to track climate change adaptation in the natural environment. <sup>[10]</sup> The main target of this study is to compare data sets with the use of data analysis and to showcase the excessive use of fossil fuels wherein it contributes a lot to the further damage that our planet is constantly receiving.

## Expected Output

This study aims to promote awareness by tackling the issue that made a fuzz in the whole world. Data sets from Our World in Data show how much fossil fuels are consumed each year by countries and per person of energy will be used. By using data sets, the concentration wherein fossil fuels are used the most will be presented.

Based on several predictions conducted by governments, coalitions, and international committees, there is agreement that rapid action is essential to avert a 1.5°C or larger rise in global temperatures. It will be difficult to achieve that goal. According to the United Nations, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), limiting global temperature rise to 1.5°C will necessitate the annual removal of 10–20 Gigatons of carbon dioxide (CO2). <sup>[11]</sup>

Direct Air Capture facilities can be situated in strategic locations—near sequestration centers, for example—rather than at the sources of emissions, such as industrial or power plants, thanks to technology that draws CO2 straight from the atmosphere. This will allow for the removal of CO2 that is currently in the atmosphere, as well as emissions from hard-to-decarbonize businesses with mobile sources including aviation, maritime, and long-haul trucks. <sup>[11]</sup>

## References

###### 1. https://www.nationalgeographic.org/encyclopedia/distribution-fossil-fuels/
###### 2. https://www.nrdc.org/stories/fossil-fuels-dirty-facts#:~:text=Coal%2C%20crude%20oil%2C%20and%20natural,have%20a%20high%20carbon%20content.
###### 3. ClientEarth Communications (2022, February 18) Fossil fuels and climate change: the facts. Retrieved from https://www.clientearth.org/latest/latest-updates/stories/fossil-fuels-and-climate-change-the-facts/#:~:text=When%20fossil%20fuels%20are%20burned,temperature%20has%20increased%20by%201C.
###### 4.Rasul Nasiri, Saeed Motesaddi Zarandi, et al. (2022) Design a protocol to investigate the effects of climate change in vivo. Retrieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S001393512200809X
###### 5. A&E Television Networks (2017, October 6) Climate Change History. Retrieved from https://www.history.com/topics/natural-disasters-and-environment/history-of-climate-change#:~:text=1988%3A%20Global%20Warming%20Gets%20Real,The%20early%201980s&text=Many%20experts%20point%20to%201988,wildfires%20within%20the%20United%20States.
###### 6. IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (2022) Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Retrieved from https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/
###### 7.	Drew Shindell & Christopher J. Smith (2019) Climate and air-quality benefits of a realistic phase-out of fossil fuels. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-019-1554-z
###### 8. Act Now (2018) The UN Campaign for Individual Action. Retrieved from https://www.un.org/actnow?gclid=Cj0KCQjw1tGUBhDXARIsAIJx01l2cSADzZRajFw0SnvFfHLqI2BW1qyOuE6IyGvYT-MgiDh1dzb8gIAaAtN_EALw_wcB](https://www.un.org/actnow?gclid=Cj0KCQjw1tGUBhDXARIsAIJx01l2cSADzZRajFw0SnvFfHLqI2BW1qyOuE6IyGvYT-MgiDh1dzb8gIAaAtN_EALw_wcB)
###### 9. Demchak (2018) Fossil Fuels: The Dirty Facts. Retrieved from https://www.nrdc.org/stories/fossil-fuels-dirty-facts#:~:text=Coal%2C%20crude%20oil%2C%20and%20natural,have%20a%20high%20carbon%20content.
###### 10. J.W.Pearce-Higgins, L.H.Antão (2022) A framework for climate change adaptation indicators for the natural environment. Retrieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1470160X22001613
###### 11. 1POINTFIVE (2022) Delivering Solutions to Reduce Global Emissions. Retrieved from https://www.1pointfive.com/?gclid=Cj0KCQjw1tGUBhDXARIsAIJx01kwOCuFZG8UU0aRG9STv65QFGwvr7kWN6kia8-mU72dnMH0PASBdIQaAiALEALw_wcB


